# Parking Lot Detection

## Prefface

The goal of this project is to develop a methodology to detect open parking spaces from a camera in real time based on methods that do not utalize machine learning. The significance of this project is twofold. Parking space detection is useful in poplulated areas, especially university campuses, and allowing people to find available parking prior to ariving at the lot is important to saving time and planning a day. This development for time and memory efficent adaptive algorithms allows for projects such as this to be run on any platform. The begining of this project, the development to the point of writing this report, is focused on developing a prototype of the algorithm in Matlab. This prototyping phase allows for quick changes and itterative development to refine the algorithm, and develop a working method.

## Instructions for Using the Program

Included in this project is the matlab file for the developed method. To implement this with different data the program requires a .mat file that contains video data in grayscale format. From this the program will prompt to define parking spaces, and these defined spaces are saved to be used later for future runs of the program. The output of the program is a video with a timelapse of the changes in the occupacy of the different detection methods, plots comparing the two methods, and statistical data from the images.

## Methodology

There has been extensive data gathering, processing and testing done to complete this project. At the beginning of the process, a camera was set up in a university building that was in clear close view of the engineering parking lot. Data was recorded from the camera from the times of 4am to 2pm on a consecutive day. after the data was recorded, ffmpeg, a video modifying command line tool,  was used to reduce the frame rate and cut out non-useful time. After that the data was small enough to analyse it in matlab on a powerful computer. the data was taken and reduced further and the final generated .mat file was 400Mb, a reasonable size to load into memory. This file was exported for later use.

### Algrithm
The next step in the process was to develop the method of detection, and ultimately two methods were chosen. One method that was used for detection was the Dicrete Laplace Opperator. The Laplace Opperator is defined as the divergence of the gradient of a function. It comes in the form,

$$
\Delta \cdot f = \nabla^{2} \cdot f = \sum_{j = 1}^{n} \frac{\partial^{2} f}{\partial x_{j}^{2}}
$$

This can be used in a variety of applications from diffusion to density of potential, but in this case it was used to find the "smoothness" of pixels on a reigon of interest, the parking space. The descritized version of the opperator can be used in the matlab function del2. The Laplace opperator is then applied to the region of intrest and compared to an expirementally determined threshold to determine occupacy. In a Smooth region of an image the laplacian is at a minimum, and this was used to define a region that had little variation in pixel value. The second method used was comparing the standard deviation of the region of interest to a baseline mean generated by a known empty space and updated periodically to fit the new average pixels of the region of intrest. The standard deviation of the pixels and the mean drop compared to the referance mean would change rapidly when a car left or entered a parking space, and this information was used to update the status of the space.

### Program Structure

After the methods for detection were developed, The program was assembled. There are key optimization and file management processes that were used to apply the methods. At the start of the program the matlab file containing the video data is given a reference, but not loaded into memory for reasons that will be explaind momentarily. The user is then prompted to create a coordinate file to be referenced and define the parking spaces. They can then create a new coordinate file or use an exhisting one if it is available. The coordinate file is generated by placing pioints on a reference image to define a ploygonal area that defines the space. The user is prompted to continue or end the process after each space is defined. Once the parking space is defined, and the file is loaded, the program generates a mask of the image at each parking space. To save space instead of loading the entire video into memory, the image data is processed in batches of 50 frames. This is the reason for creating a reference to the file as opposed to loading it at the start. for each frame, the methods are applied to the region of interests defined over the mask, and the occupacy is stored. From that data a new video is formed and annotated. Once the procram is complete, The video output is generated for both methods and comparison and statistical diagrams are siplayed for the user to analyze.

## Resilts

